# ai-case-study
Module 1 Challenge
# Pika - Revolutionizing idea-to-video AI Generation 
## How Pika is using Defussion modeling Algothrims to lead the ML race in video generation

* Name of company

Pika

* When was the company incorporated?

April 2023

* Who are the founders of the company?

Demi Guo and Chenlin Meng, both dropped out of Stanford University’s artificial intelligence PhD program to start the company. 

* How did the idea for the company (or project) come about?

Guo described it as, “Video is at the heart of entertainment, yet the process of making high-quality videos to date is still complicated and resource-intensive. When we started Pika six months ago, we wanted to push the boundaries of technology and design a future interface of video making that is effortless and accessible to everyone. Since then, we’re proud to have grown the Pika community to half a million users, who are generating millions of videos per week.” Prior to Stanford, Guo was an engineer at Meta specializing in AI research, while Meng co-authored numerous AI research papers, mostly focusing on generative AI. While in school Buzzy AI video editor, Runway, was offering a $10,000 prize for the best film at AI film festival. While Guo, Meng and their team of classmates were a very technical team, they struggled to make the film. So they set out to redesign the interface of video-making in an attempt to make good videos easier to create or modify. Initally focused on animation and anime the co-founders came up with the idea, left Stanford, designed Pika and set out to help people make video content easier and to edit utilizing AI in ways no one has ever seen before. 

* How is the company funded? How much funding have they received?

Guo has been cultivating a professional network since middle school. People and mentors that she met while attending competitions like the International Olympiad in Informatics (IOI), in which she won a silver medal in 2015. It was a mentor she met through the IOI that thought it had a lot of promise and helped connect her with Nat Friedman, the former CEO of GitHub. Guo and Meng created an early demo version of Pika using a single graphics processing unit (GPU), and Friedman was very impressed. Friedman and Daniel Gross have amassed a 2,500-plus GPU cluster they call Andromeda. Companies that they have invested in are able to use Andromeda - with which Pika then exploded. There was a ton of hype around the company in Silicon Valley so they were able to easily find investors, raising $55 in three rounds initially. The first two were led by Nat Friedman, followed by a $35 million Series A from Lightspeed Venture Partners. Fast forward 6 months later, they raised another $80 million with the release of Pika 1.0. This brings Pika’s total funding to over $135 million. Business Insider estimates that the raise values the company at $700 million. Spark Capital led this round. Other notable investors include Greycroft, Neo, Makers Fund, actor Jared Leto, and Atlantic Records Chairman Craig Kallman.

## Business Activities

* What specific problem is the company or project trying to solve?

Making high-quality videos is resource intensive and complicated, they plan to solve that by making video making easier and accessible to everyone. The idea-to-video process will help push creative boundaries and allow people to bring concepts to life. From crafting engaging memes to producing movies this tool is capable of quite a lot. You can type in just text and it will translate that into a high quality video. Turn an image into a video, with or without text prompts added. You can change what someone is wearing or add accessories that move flawlessly with whatever character is on screen. If you have a video you want to expand or fit whatever new dimensions it will fill in whatever background it needs to in order for the video to make sense in context. You can get as nitty gritty as being able to change the frames per second, how the camera behaves or transitions, negative prompts, change the entire format into something entirely new like animation or adding visual effects. All while being incredibly user friendly and redefining video production. Using AI allows them to remove technical barriers that were incredibly limiting to the general public with regards to video production. You no longer need to learn how to use complex programs like After Effects or 3D Imaging programs like Blender. This is going to make video production accessible to people of all skill levels, during a time when video is by far the most popular medium of entertainment. While the team is incredibly technical they seem to possess a deep understanding of what the user’s needs are and are able to cater to any limitations users may come into on a wide spectrum of video needs.

* Who is the company's intended customer? Is there any information about the market size of this set of customers?

Their slogan is “We’re for anyone with an imagination”. This wasn’t made with the film industry in mind, this was built for everyday customers. “Creators at heart, but not that professional” as Guo would put it. Anyone who wants to make videos come to life in/from just about any form. In the U.K. they found that 79% of Gen Z is using some form of generative AI. Whether it be AI tools, services like ChatGPT, apps or Snapchat’s My AI. While O’Reilly’s generative AI in enterprise report showed that 26% of corporations are still in the early stages of navigating generative AI. The potential dangers to privacy, security, safety and legal queries such as who owns the copyright of AI-generated content, are causing some companies to use caution. From the beta and prior to the release of Pika 1.0 they had admassed a user base of over half a million people, that was before 2024 and mind you in a span of a mere 6 months. They gained over 30 million views on TikTok. From November to February they grew to 700k+. There aren’t any definitive numbers for current users but if their growth was any indication I would not be surprised if that number has not surpassed a million. They have nearly 800k members on their Discord today, and that doesn’t include mobile or desktop users. AI has already dominated the online community, and the user base is only growing as more and more people realize the capabilities and advantages.

* What solution does this company offer that their competitors do not or cannot offer? (What is the unfair advantage they utilize?)

In the beginning, Pika revolved around only generating anime. The founders admitted that taking on AI generation of realistic video with companies like Runway, Synthesia, and Stability AI already far ahead, would be too difficult. Additionally Adobe, a $280 billion is moving quickly to integrate AI into their Creative Suite. The thing that set them apart, was their rapid pace of development. Friedman tells a story, one day he asked to make a text to video feature. He got a text at 3 a.m. the very same day, saying it’s ready. Their work pace has been described as “very intense”. Within a week of them saying it would be too difficult, they pulled it off. They were asked about an app in November, Guo delivered that same month. They have to move fast to make a name for themselves before the bigger companies like OpenAI and Google, put out their own versions of AI video generation. A huge plus of having Friedman as an investor is having access to the Andromeda cluster and a huge amount of computer processing power. They are leasing a few hundred GPUs now from a combination of hosts. In addition to exploring algorithms to improve the model, and attempting something that none of their rivals have been able to achieve. There are costly IP litigation implications with copyrighted materials, so Pika is working to create an algorithm that can hopefully filter said copyright material. Pika has differentiated themselves in a number of ways. As an example, Pika 1.0 comes with a tool that is able to extend the length of any already existing videos or turn them into a different style entirely like animated, claymation, live action… Additionally you are able to change someone’s clothing or even add an entirely new character that wasn’t previously in the video, which some companies have achieved individually but not as a whole or as realistic/customizable. As testament to the fact they have differentiated themselves from competition, one of their largest investors, Lightspeed, is also invested in Stability AI - showing that the two companies are different enough to not be direct competition. They differentiate themselves further by being for the people, while companies like Adobe focus on products for film professionals. When they started in beta they intently listened to feedback, integrating all insights and suggestions, ensuring the popularity of it’s user-focused design. So when it came time for the release of Pika 1.0 it not only met but exceeded users expectations in ease of use and functionality. Users have raved about the timeliness in which any and all questions are answered by the company. All nearly fully answered within 10 minutes on Discord, even early morning hours. They also run daily themes for you to experiment with or challenges you can submit to, like whoever makes this cat breakdance best wins. Winners get special Discord roles as a sign of achievement, the watermarks are removed, product discounts, and prizes which not only identifies their core users but motivates them. Pika also hosts events, influencer marketing, content marketing classes, tutorials, showcases, media exposure and offline events like a Hackaton in the Bay Area. This team at Pika hit the ground running ever since inception and hasn’t seemed to slow down since, it’s quite impressive and seems to be quite the advantage. In addition, they were the first to create something truly innovative in the space, so while they can continue to increase user data, users, content, etc. Other bigger companies will be struggling to keep up.

* Which technologies are they currently using, and how are they implementing them? (This may take a little bit of sleuthing&mdash;you may want to search the company’s engineering blog or use sites like Stackshare to find this information.)

Pika is currently using 16 technologies for it’s website according to BuiltWith. Including Viewport Meta, IPhone/Mobile Compatible, Euro, Google Cloud, Google Font API, Cloudflare, Hosting, jsDelivr, and GitHub Buttons. According to Wappalyzer, for Static site generator they are using Next.js. For page builders, Webflow. Google Workspace for Webmail, styled-components for Development, and Node.js as main programming language. The Web framework is Next.js. They work with Vimeo as a video player, Tailwind CSS for their UI framework and Next.js again for their web servers. Stripe for a payment processor, Vercel for PaaS, and Google Tag Manager for Tag management. In terms of JavaScript frameworks they are using Next.js, React, GSAP, and styled-components. HSTS for Security. On the frontend they are using Next.js and Tailwind. For authentication they are using Supabase, for hosting and deployment they are using Vercel. For RUM they are using Cloudflare Browser Insights, for Performance they are using Prioity Hints, and Front Scripts they’re using Google Font API. The JavaScript libraries they are using are core-js, jQuery, and Swiper. For CDN they use Cloudflare, jsDelivr, Google Hosted Libraries, and cdnjs. For Analytics they use Cloudflare Browser Insights, PostHog, and Google Analytics. A few miscellaneous things they use are Open Graph and LottieFiles. Using ML, Pika is able to learn from tons of videos. It is able to find what is more engaging, or different styles and it only learns more from feedback and more data. However this isn’t just any ML, this is diffusion-based. This approach was inspired by thermodynamics in the sense of increasing entropy. It starts with a image, slowly small amounts of noise are added until eventually the entire image is obscured by noise. The neural network then systematically removes the noise back to the original image. Traditionally these neural networks would just directly generate the image, but by using diffusion modeling the network is able to learn all the intricacies of noise elimination to reconstruct a clear image. To ensure that the algorithm listens to a certain set of rules they also use conditional diffusion by embedding instructions within the algorithm during it’s generation process. Ensuring the final output aligns with their set directives. With video there is another layer of complexity, mastering the temporal aspect of videos. Videos must have visual consistency while also being able to have diversity in styles and content. This is where training the AI is absolutely critical to achieving the ability for Pika to understand the natural ebb and flow of videos, and then replicating it. Not only is Pika using these highly technical ML algorithms but they are adaptable and will continuously evolve. 

## Landscape

* What field is the company in?

Entertainment.

* What are the other major companies in this field?

For now, Pika is one of only a handful of companies capable of offering text-to-video software. OpenAI and their version of video generator, Sora, are by far the biggest threat, but there has yet to be a release date announced. A similarly large-pocket threat is Google’s version, Veo. RunwayML are currently their largest competitor but Pika has been able to differentiate themselves quite a bit with the release of Pika 1.0. You could argue companies like Stability AI’s Stable Video Diffusion, Meta’s coming Emu Video AI and Adobe’s Rephrase.ai are competitors, but Pika stands out drastically with its innovative features, mixed with a dramatically easier interface and user experience, it seems they are winning the race so to speak. Other companies only hold a piece of the puzzle like Synthesia, used to create avatars, or OpusClip which repurposes long-form video. Other companies include Invideo AI, Descript, Fliki, Visla, Colossyan, DeepBrain AI, and Hour One. But just as the aformentioned companies, they only hold a piece of the puzzle or are meant for a niche subsect of this field like social media. My prediction is that Pika will be the ChatGPT of generative AI video with the two co-founders at the helm, furiously pushing innovation, new features, and truly listening to user feedback.

## Results

* What has been the business impact of this company so far?

While initially free, in April they’ve included a subscription option. Anyone can generate up to 25 clips for free every month, otherwise you can pay $8 a month for a premium subscription. For more commercial use clients they also offer a $58 per month Pro subscription. So they have learned how to monetize. The impact they have already had on the AI community has been fun to watch. Pika has made video production easier for such a vast user base. Teachers are able to create more engaging videos, without all the expensive equipment or extensive technical knowledge. Businesses are able to create advertisements that pull people in, that they may have not had the funds to previously allocate. Entrepreneurs are able to create versatile and creative professional logos for new business ideas even though they may not have an artistic bone in their body. Videos from the 50’s can be recovered, restored, and enhanced. Yoga teachers, students, musicians, animators, writers, influencers, aspiring filmmakers, etc. The outpour of support from the community has been amazing. It’s hard to find a blog or argument for any of the other idea-to-video companies on the market in comparison to Pika. Even though RunwayML costs money, and Pika is free at it’s base model, people still seem to prefer Pika. The only thing I’ve seen in all my research that they were better at in practice was the skylines from RunwayML are a bit more vibrant. People seem to absolutely love it and from such a broad range of people in seemingly vastly different fields. This community is further testament to it’s ability to meet the needs of all users and it’s broad appeal to reach anyone looking for help creating content of any form. 

* What are some of the core metrics that companies in this field use to measure success? How is your company performing based on these metrics?

Debatably one of the highest measures of success in Silicon Valley is the speed in which you are able to develop. They went from an idea to beta to product in a staggering amount of time. Agility and user-centric products seem to be booming in the tech industry currently and it makes sense as to why. For startups especially, the rate they can develop is paramount to staying ahead of the competition in a highly competitive and ever rapidly changing market. While projections/profit from their new subscription service are not public knowledge, the company has made a huge step in hopefully becoming profitable. The community they have created and inspired every step of the way will go a long way for them in the long run. People will be loyal to them as long as they keep listening to feedback which I get the sense they will. I used Adobe products for years and years and years, they seemingly made it a less intuitive version year after year. Often changing functions completely that took me months to learn to get the hang of, or just scrapping them all together. They made the creative suite for professionals that have spent hours committed to using and learning the intricacies of their tools. I have 0 brand loyalty to Adobe, they don’t connect and relate to their customers on even a smidge of the same level as Pika and the community has taken notice and showed their appreciation. The fact alone that they were able to garner half a million users in 4 months is absolutely mind blowing and could be a case study within itself. Surely, the rate of adoption, the views they have achieved on social media sites like TikTok alone, the fact they have raised a whopping 135k from two sessions of fundraising. Not to mention have the backing of and support from an investor of the level of Nat Friedman and his Andromeda, which is an accomplishment within itself as well. Then there is my personal indication of success with a company, they have made so many people excited. Excited for this technology, for what they can be capable of using it. They have undoubtedly changed so many lives of people struggling with video production already and this is just the beginning. As someone who used to work in the film industry I cannot even begin to tell you how useful this would have been to me back then. I would be a Pro subscriber if still in that industry. Anytime you create something that gets people excited to talk about, or share their creation using something you helped them make, that is success to me.

* How is your company performing relative to competitors in the same field?

Runway was leading the AI video space with their Gen-2 model, also capable of text-to-video, image, or both. The functionality, friendly user interface, ease of use, game changing new features, and the ever rising interest in AI video generation have led to a massive user adoption rate with Pika since inception. They seem to have created a very strong user community and created a sense of belonging, as a byproduct those same users are publically praising Pika over Runway all over the internet. It has sparked collaboration between users and the reddit pages regarding Pika are absolutely teeming with new excited users excited to share their creations and marvel at others in an attempt to even better learn the system. The AI innovations they have created are unlike anything the competition is capable of and as such they have really taken the lead in the video generating space. The only suggestion I’ve seen across all my research is an expanded content library but they always started by praising Pika first. While the threat of OpenAI, Google, Meta, and Adobe are looming, they seem to be trailing in the video generation department. There are other tools that can help with text-to-video or picture-to-video but none that are remotely capable of what Pika has to offer currently.

## Recommendations

* If you were to advise the company, what products or services would you suggest they offer? (This could be something that a competitor offers, or use your imagination!)

An obvious money-grab tactic would be to utilize those daily users by  marketing to them through the daily challenges, but you risk isolating your core demographic. There also doesn’t seem to be a ton of options with regards to 3D rendering images but that is a very niche market so I understand that going on the backburner. Honestly my advice would be to listen to the customer, they will tell you how to improve the system and any features that would be helpful to them. That seems to be their biggest strength and I would lean into it. The functionality of adding music is not exactly as polished as it could be for people making music videos and things of the sort. That would be my first suggestion of how to improve and better their existing product. The challenges and prizes for said challenges could also be ramped up with better prizes to raise the awareness, submissions, etc. Additionally, the professional filmmakers could be better supported as I will go into in the next question.

* Why do you think that offering this product or service would benefit the company?

They’ve already reached their core demographic, the everyday user. Now would be a time they can focus on the highest tier subscription users that may be in the professional film industry but can use this for a multitude of purposes. Pre-editing footage and lining up sound with footage was a nightmare back in the day and never seemed to line up perfectly with the slate. If they could eliminate this and have an algorithm do it for you, that would eliminate hours of man hours in film heavy cities and incentivize your highest paying customers to stay at that tier, simultaneously increasing profit. When you record in a professional setting you have seperate audio and seperate video, if I were able to input all labeled footage and it could parse through the audio and video and align and combine them, that would be a huge breakthrough in the film industry and quite a cool feature they could offer their top tier subscribers. In terms of beneifting the company this would increase their monthly profit by adding new top tier subscribers, and introduce Pika to a huge untapped market they have tried to avoid since inception, without offending or affecting their current userbase. They could even cut deals with the major studios if the algortihm was effective enough.

* What technologies would this additional product or service utilize?

Mixing this with the everyday user and film professionals would open up capabilities of filmmakers of all levels, especially those just starting out that may have forgotten something in frame or didn’t notice a cup was on the ground for one take but not the next. The way you can edit people out of pictures on the new Droid phones but in video would be a game changer for the film industry alike. You could shoot in heavily populated areas without having to worry about getting other people in frame as you can just edit them out. As this tool evolves it only makes sense that they would extend the creative capabilities which in a sense is bringing all those everyday users closer to being filmmakers and creatives and understanding the process a bit better. Currently you can remove things from frame in the videos, which newer creatives would find incredibly useful. While this new tracking technolgy would be catering to a more advanced subset of customers that would be heavy traffic users. The algorithm they create would have to effectively learn how to determine where in the audio the snap is from the slate and line the sound of the snap with the visual clap of the slate from the video side. Presumably they could effectively use ML for this technology as well.

* Why are these technologies appropriate for your solution?

At the end of the day this tool is used to generate and edit high quality videos, the people that could most benefit from that are the people using it on a daily basis. There’s a reason why Adobe is by far the leading editing platform, because of the capabilities and professionalism it allows you. We are just beginning to scratch the surface of generative AI video production. The capabilities of what people could use this for will keep expanding as more and more people lean into the use of AI and the things it can allow us to create and do. They have seemingly mastered or at least are the front runner when it comes to idea-to-video generation, but they have a lot they could advance on in terms of video editing specifically. Something their current demographic doesn't have a need for, but could open up the door to a lot more users without isolating your original adopters.
